README.md, before:

# High-Frequency Trading Stats Service

This project is a high-performance RESTful service built in Rust, designed to handle the rigorous demands of high-frequency trading (HFT) systems. It allows for the real-time ingestion of trading data and provides near-instantaneous statistical analysis on variable-sized windows of that data.

-----

## Core Technology & Design Choices

The service was engineered with a focus on performance, safety, and robustness.

### Language: Rust

**Rust** was chosen for its unique combination of strengths, making it ideal for HFT systems:

  - **Peak Performance**: Rust offers C-level performance with zero-cost abstractions, ensuring minimal latency.
  - **Memory Safety**: The ownership and borrow checker guarantees memory safety at compile time, eliminating entire classes of bugs like data races and null pointer dereferences.
  - **Fearless Concurrency**: Rust's safety guarantees make it easier to write correct and highly efficient concurrent code, perfect for handling many simultaneous requests.

### Data Structure: Segment Tree

The core requirement is to perform statistical analysis (`min`, `max`, `avg`, `var`) on the last `n` data points with a time complexity **better than O(n)**. The **Segment Tree** was chosen as the optimal data structure, as it can calculate all required statistics for any given range in **`O(log N)` time**, where `N` is the total number of data points.

### Implementation: Iterative vs. Recursive

This service uses a non-recursive **iterative implementation** of the Segment Tree for maximum performance. This approach avoids function call overhead and the risk of stack overflow, providing a meaningful performance advantage in a latency-sensitive HFT system.

### Error Handling

The service uses a custom `AppError` enum combined with the **`thiserror`** crate. This pattern provides compile-time, type-safe error handling and allows for precise control over the HTTP status codes and error messages returned to the client.

-----

## Production Features

This service includes several features essential for running in a production environment:

### Configuration Management

The server's behavior is configured via a `Config.toml` file and can be overridden with environment variables (e.g., `APP_SERVER__PORT=9090`). This is managed by the **`figment`** crate.

### Structured Logging

The service uses the **`tracing`** framework to emit structured (JSON-formatted) logs.

### Graceful Shutdown

The server listens for termination signals (`Ctrl+C` or `SIGTERM`) and will shut down gracefully, allowing any in-flight requests to complete before exiting.

-----

## Testing Strategy

The project employs a comprehensive testing strategy to ensure reliability and correctness, utilizing both unit and integration tests to cover API validation, error handling, and performance under load. To run all tests, execute `cargo test`.

-----

## How to Build and Launch

### Prerequisites

  - The Rust toolchain (install via [rustup.rs](https://rustup.rs/))

### Build

Navigate to the project's root directory and run the build command with the `--release` flag to enable optimizations.

```sh
cargo build --release
```

The optimized executable will be located at `target/release/hft-service`.

### Launch

You can run the service directly with Cargo or by executing the compiled binary.

```sh
# Option 1: Run using Cargo
cargo run --release

# Option 2: Run the compiled binary directly
./target/release/hft-service
```

The service will start and listen on the port specified in `Config.toml` (default `8080`).

-----

## API Endpoints

### 1\. Health Check

Verifies that the service is running.

  - **Endpoint**: `GET /health`
  - **Success Response**:
    ```json
    {
      "status": "ok"
    }
    ```

### 2\. Add Data Batch

Adds a batch of consecutive (and non-negative) trading prices for a specific symbol.

  - **Endpoint**: `POST /add_batch/`
  - **Content-Type**: `application/json`
  - **Example (`curl`)**:
    ```sh
    curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/add_batch/ \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -d '{"symbol": "ABC-USD", "values": [150.5, 151.0, 150.8, 151.2]}'
    ```

### 3\. Get Statistics

Provides statistical analysis on the last `1e{k}` data points for a symbol.

  - **Endpoint**: `GET /stats/`
  - **Query Parameters**:
      - `symbol`: The financial instrument's identifier.
      - `k`: An integer from 1 to 8.
  - **Example (`curl`)**:
    ```sh
    # Get stats for the last 1e1 (10) data points of ABC-USD
    curl "http://localhost:8080/stats/?symbol=ABC-USD&k=1"
    ```

Commit message:

refactor(hft-service) Improvements
* Start using DashMap instead of RwLock.
* Rename variables to be more descriptive.
* Add test_data_availability_errors integration test.

README.md, after:

# High-Frequency Trading Stats Service

This project is a high-performance RESTful service built in Rust, designed to handle the rigorous demands of high-frequency trading (HFT) systems. It allows for the real-time ingestion of trading data and provides near-instantaneous statistical analysis on variable-sized windows of that data.

-----

## Core Technology & Design Choices

The service was engineered with a focus on performance, safety, and robustness.

### Language: Rust

**Rust** was chosen for its unique combination of strengths, making it ideal for HFT systems:

  - **Peak Performance**: Rust offers C-level performance with zero-cost abstractions, ensuring minimal latency.
  - **Memory Safety**: The ownership and borrow checker guarantees memory safety at compile time, eliminating entire classes of bugs like data races and null pointer dereferences.
  - **Fearless Concurrency**: Rust's safety guarantees make it easier to write correct and highly efficient concurrent code, perfect for handling many simultaneous requests.

### Data Structure: Segment Tree

The core requirement is to perform statistical analysis (`min`, `max`, `avg`, `var`) on the last `n` data points with a time complexity **better than O(n)**. The **Segment Tree** was chosen as the optimal data structure, as it can calculate all required statistics for any given range in **`O(log N)` time**, where `N` is the total number of data points.

### Implementation: Iterative vs. Recursive

This service uses a non-recursive **iterative implementation** of the Segment Tree for maximum performance. This approach avoids function call overhead and the risk of stack overflow, providing a meaningful performance advantage in a latency-sensitive HFT system.

### Concurrency Model: DashMap

To handle high volumes of concurrent requests efficiently, the service uses a DashMap. Unlike a standard HashMap protected by a single RwLock, DashMap provides fine-grained locking on a per-symbol basis. This eliminates a global bottleneck and allows requests for different symbols to be processed in parallel, significantly increasing throughput.

### Numeric Type: f64 vs. rust_decimal

The service deliberately uses the native f64 type over a precision library like rust_decimal. For high-frequency trading, raw speed is the highest priority, and hardware-accelerated f64 operations are significantly faster.

### Error Handling

The service uses a custom `AppError` enum combined with the **`thiserror`** crate. This pattern provides compile-time, type-safe error handling and allows for precise control over the HTTP status codes and error messages returned to the client.

-----

## Production Features

This service includes several features essential for running in a production environment:

### Configuration Management

The server's behavior is configured via a `Config.toml` file and can be overridden with environment variables (e.g., `APP_SERVER__PORT=9090`). This is managed by the **`figment`** crate.

### Structured Logging

The service uses the **`tracing`** framework to emit structured (JSON-formatted) logs.

### Graceful Shutdown

The server listens for termination signals (`Ctrl+C` or `SIGTERM`) and will shut down gracefully, allowing any in-flight requests to complete before exiting.

-----

## Testing Strategy

The project employs a comprehensive testing strategy to ensure reliability and correctness, utilizing both unit and integration tests to cover API validation, error handling, and performance under load. To run all tests, execute `cargo test`.

-----

## How to Build and Launch

### Prerequisites

  - The Rust toolchain (install via [rustup.rs](https://rustup.rs/))

### Build

Navigate to the project's root directory and run the build command with the `--release` flag to enable optimizations.

```sh
cargo build --release
```

The optimized executable will be located at `target/release/hft-service`.

### Launch

You can run the service directly with Cargo or by executing the compiled binary.

```sh
# Option 1: Run using Cargo
cargo run --release

# Option 2: Run the compiled binary directly
./target/release/hft-service
```

The service will start and listen on the port specified in `Config.toml` (default `8080`).

-----

## API Endpoints

### 1\. Health Check

Verifies that the service is running.

  - **Endpoint**: `GET /health`
  - **Success Response**:
    ```json
    {
      "status": "ok"
    }
    ```

### 2\. Add Data Batch

Adds a batch of consecutive (and non-negative) trading prices for a specific symbol.

  - **Endpoint**: `POST /add_batch/`
  - **Content-Type**: `application/json`
  - **Example (`curl`)**:
    ```sh
    curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/add_batch/ \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -d '{"symbol": "ABC-USD", "values": [150.5, 151.0, 150.8, 151.2]}'
    ```

### 3\. Get Statistics

Provides statistical analysis on the last `1e{k}` data points for a symbol.

  - **Endpoint**: `GET /stats/`
  - **Query Parameters**:
      - `symbol`: The financial instrument's identifier.
      - `exponent`: An integer from 1 to 8.
  - **Example (`curl`)**:
    ```sh
    # Get stats for the last 1e1 (10) data points of ABC-USD
    curl "http://localhost:8080/stats/?symbol=ABC-USD&exponent=1"
    ```
